# Publish to npm

This action will publish a GitHub repository to npm using GitHub Actions and is designed to work in tandem with the [npm-prepare-release](../npm-prepare-release/README.md) action. It is compatible with GitHub's Branch Protection.

The `npm-prepare-release` action is meant to be called first and will create a pull request. The `npm-publish` action is meant to be called automatically once the pull request is merged. It will publish to npm after running light validation (verify the pull request contains only expected changes, running `npm test`, and more), publish to npm, create a new GitHub release and add a version tag to the repository. Finally, it will create a pull request to upgrade to the next develop version, which is assigned to the user who merged the first pull request.

## Inputs

* `NPM_TOKEN`: (required) the npm token used to publish the package.
* `GH_TOKEN`: (required) the GitHub access token to use. It is recommended to use the standard GitHub Actions access token (used in example).
* `node-version`: (optional) the Node.js version to use for the Action.
* `PROVENANCE`: (optional) set to `true` to generate provenance statement for the published package. Requires the `id-token: write` permission.

## Using the action

1. Add a GitHub Actions secret (Settings > Secrets > Actions) called `NPM_TOKEN` which is an automation token for the npmjs.com user you'll use to publish to npm.
2. If you require any form of clean + build steps to be run prior to publishing, do so via an npm script called `prepare`. The publish script triggers `npm run prepare --if-present` as part of the install and test step. Here's an example snippet from `package.json` (note: it assumes you have `rimraf` installed as a `devDep`):

```
"scripts": {
  ...
  "prepare": "npm run clean && npm run build",
  "clean": "rimraf dist",
  "build": "babel src -o dist",
  ...
},
```

3. Add the following to a `npm-publish.yml` file in `.github/workflows` in the main branch of the GitHub repository you want to publish to npm:

```yaml
---
name: Publish to npm (if applicable)
on:
  pull_request:
    types: [closed]

jobs:
  publish:
    name: Publish to npm
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    if: contains( github.event.pull_request.labels.*.name, '[ Type ] NPM version update' ) && startsWith( github.head_ref, 'release/') && github.event.pull_request.merged == true
    steps:
      - uses: Automattic/vip-actions/npm-publish@vX.Y.Z
        with:
          GH_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
          NPM_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.NPM_TOKEN }}
```

Add any custom input values and set the version to the latest published one.

With this configuration applied, the package will now be automatically published to NPM once pull requests generated by `npm-prepare-release` are merged.

4. Ensure that tokens can be used to publish the relevant npm package and that the particular token used has permissions to do so.

## Required Permissions

* `contents: write` to publish a new release on GitHub;
* `pull-requests: write` to create a pull request to update package version;
* `id-token: write` to generate provenance statement (only when `provenance` is set to `true`).

# Inspired by

The initial code was inspired by https://help.github.com/actions/language-and-framework-guides/publishing-nodejs-packages
